README.md, before:

# Moby Duck: An Abstract Audio Visualiser

Video Demonstration:

[![YouTube](https://i.ytimg.com/vi/COJVn6kwEO0/maxresdefault.jpg?sqp=-oaymwEmCIAKENAF8quKqQMa8AEB-AH-CYAC0AWKAgwIABABGBEgcigxMA8=&rs=AOn4CLAHZKIKf9K6LVqRE-1SGsLdISzUow)](https://youtu.be/COJVn6kwEO0)

## Playback Instructions
- To start the visual demonstration: press the spacebar (space key) once
- To restart: press the spacebar again

*The scenes automatically changes during playback (see 'How It Works')*

## Project Members
- C21376161 Dmytro Kosynskyy [@DimaKosy](https://github.com/DimaKosy)
- C21344786 Shawn Lorenzo [@ByteFlypVS](https://github.com/ByteFlypVS)
- C21518659 Norbert Krupa [@Voirtez](https://github.com/Voirtez)
- C21427252 Darren Grants [@darrenomight](https://github.com/darrenomight)
- C21321073 Domas Mockus [@Orbdom](https://github.com/Orbdom)

# Description Of The Project

## Project Brief
- Create an abstract visual representation of a song of your choosing
- Visualise using Java Processing, Minim and/or Processing Sound libraries
- It should represent the chosen song's theme, narrative, mood, tempo and/or structure
- Showcase teamwork, creativity, technical skills and communication through tools such as GitHub for project management

## The Song: Moby Duck (The Longest Johns)

[![YouTube](https://i.ytimg.com/vi/xA7e_dxDOCo/hq720.jpg?sqp=-oaymwEcCNAFEJQDSFXyq4qpAw4IARUAAIhCGAFwAcABBg==&rs=AOn4CLDuQlaJv-4ykUREOM2cqb-ALwUR2w)](https://youtu.be/xA7e_dxDOCo)

While Dmytro was searching for a song for our project, he got confronted by a flock of ducks. They wouldn't scatter quickly enough so he apparently waved his foot across them and scared them off!
Then he had an idea...

Sea shanties were always cool to him and one of the most memorable ones when he saw those ducks was this hit by The Longest Johns. It depicts a long-retired sailor, whose solitude was interrupted by a mythical, giant duck on his lake. He then goes to settle the score with the duck with the help of his ol' mates, and after a long, well-fought battle, they celebrated with a banquet of BBQed duck, pancakes and oyster sauce!

When he gave the piece to the team, we thought it was funny and would be a fun theme to explore; from ducks to ships to waves and even obscure nautical references! It was light-hearted and fast-paced, and honestly we agreed to use it as everyone else had no idea what song to choose at the time... Oh well!

## Visual Representations

### Dmytro: Ducks, Ships And Waves

![Duck Scale](images/j2.png)
I made two visuals for this project, one is a simple circle of rotating ducks which respond to the frequency bands. It is based off the cubes example shown in class.

```Java
for(int i = 0; i < DuckScaler.length; i++) {
		DuckScaler[i] = PApplet.map(mv.getSmoothedBands()[i],0,200,0.5f,3);
}
```

![Duck Battle](images/j4.png)
The second visual creates an array of points. These points go from right to left at a set pace, their height is set by the average frequency bands value which is then multiplied by a sin() function and lerped.

```Java
float BufferAvg() {
	float Avg;
	Avg = 0;
	for(int i = 0 ; i < mv.getBands().length ; i ++) {
		Avg += mv.getSmoothedBands()[i];
	}

	return (Avg/mv.getBands().length) *  0.3f;
}
```

```Java
if(p2 < p1) {
	points[(i + ((Move < 0)?0:1))%AmtPoints] = PApplet.lerp(points[(i + ((Move < 0)?1:0))%AmtPoints],(float)Math.sin(i*0.1)*ToLerp,0.5f);
	continue;
}
```

Each point is joined to the next point to make a wave like so:
```Java
mv.line(p1, points[i] + WaveHeight, p2, points[(i+1)%AmtPoints] + WaveHeight);
```
...which allows us to render a single wave.

By rendering multiple waves we can also call on the JoinWaveVerts() function.
This function joines the vertices of the waves so as to create triangles between them.

```Java
void JoinWaveVerts(Wave w1) {
	if(w1 == null) {
		return;
	}

	for(int i = 0; i < w1.AmtPoints; i++) {

		float p1 = ((float)(i)/AmtPoints)*WaveWidth;
		float p2 = (i < w1.AmtPoints)?(((float)(i+1)/AmtPoints)*WaveWidth):(p1);

		mv.line(p1, GrabWavePoint(p1), p1, w1.GrabWavePoint(p1));
		mv.line(p1, GrabWavePoint(p1)+2, p2, w1.GrabWavePoint(p2)-2);
	}
}
```

### Shawn: What's Out There?

![Planning Chart](images/j3.png)
Taking inspiration from the general nautical theme of the song, I created a visual that represents how sailors would get their data on the high seas. It features 4 distinct elements:

- A background chart 'surface' to put the visual displays on
- A sonar wave with tuned amplitudes to cover certain frequency ranges
- A radar screen with an estimated location of ducks from the sonar
- A radio transmission set to check how the sailor's communications are holding

Audio data was being processed through the MyVisual/Visual class, which uses the Java Minim audio processing library. This was then modified to create certain wave amplitude behaviour for the sonar, such as:

``` Java
// Wave visualisation method (with scaling/lerp functions)
public void modWave(float scale)
{
	mv.pushStyle();
	mv.beginShape();

	for(int i = 0; i < mv.getAudioBuffer().size(); i++)
	{
		waveX = MyVisual.map(i, 0, mv.getAudioBuffer().size(), topX, topX+shapeW);
		waveY = MyVisual.map(mv.getAudioBuffer().get(i), -1, 1, -scale*shapeH, scale*shapeH);
		waveY = MyVisual.lerp(topY+shapeH/2, topY+shapeH/2+waveY, scale);
		waveY = MyVisual.constrain(waveY, topY, topY+shapeH);

		mv.smooth();
		mv.noFill();
		mv.stroke(255, 255, 0); // Change colour here
		mv.strokeWeight(4);
		mv.curveVertex(waveX, waveY);
	}

	mv.endShape();
	mv.popStyle();
}
```

...where 'scale' is a scaling factored applied to the lerped y-values for the AudioBuffer.

While the current positions of the displays are fixed for the project, they could be rearranged in any alignment through code similar to this:

``` Java
sonar1.screen(shapeW, (shapeH/2)-(shapeH/3), shapeW/2.5f, shapeH/6, 7, "Broadband Sonar", shapeH/42, "Hz", 0);
```

...where the final parameter '0' indicates that the display should be left-centre aligned to the chart.

It should be noted that the sailor from the song was likely from the 1800's, so he probably didn't have access to these tools to find pirates, let alone a giant duck!

### Norbert: Lively Lyrics

![Lyric Wave](images/j1.png)
My visual is a wave of lyrics that changes height with the amplitude of the song. To make this, I used three classes:

#### Norbert
- Primary drawing class
- Handles all logic in this visual

#### Character
- Stores the display character as a char data type
- Also stores the x and y values as floats

``` Java
public class Character
{
    MyVisual mv;
    char c;
    float x;
    float y;

    public Character(MyVisual mv, char c, float x, float y)
    {
        this.mv = mv;
        this.c = c;
        this.x = x;
        this.y = y;

    }
}
```

#### LyricLine
- Stores lyric line as an array list of Character objects
- Also stores the timestamp for the song

``` Java
public class LyricLine
{
    MyVisual mv;
    ArrayList<Character> line = new ArrayList<Character>();
    int timestamp;

    public LyricLine(MyVisual mv, ArrayList<Character> line, int timestamp)
    {
        this.mv = mv;
        this.line = line;
        this.timestamp = timestamp;
    }
}
```

I created an array list of LyricLine objects in the Norbert class. I then parsed the lyrics as a text file in the format <timestamp in milliseconds> <lyric> split this into two parts.
I stored the timestamps into the timestamp variables in the LyricLine objects. Then I split the line of lyrics into individual characters and stored the characters into the array list of Character objects in the LyricLine object.

``` Java
for(int i = 0; i < lines.length; i++)
{
	String[] words = PApplet.split(lines[i], " ");
      	int timestamp = Integer.parseInt(words[0]);

      	ArrayList<Character> line = new ArrayList<Character>();

      	for(int j = 1; j < words.length; j++)
       	{
       		String word = words[j];

              	for(int k = 0; k < word.length(); k++)
                {
                	char c = word.charAt(k);
                    	line.add(new Character(mv, c, mv.width + mv.textWidth(c ), mv.height / 2)); 
                }

               	line.add(new Character(mv, ' ', mv.width, mv.height / 2));
    	}

     	lyrics.add(new LyricLine(mv, line, timestamp));
}
```

I then use an if statement to check the position of the audio player. If the position of the player is equal to the timestamp, the corresponding line of lyrics is displayed on the right side of the screen.
The lyric line is displayed character by character using the text() function adding sin(radians(x) * amplitude to the y. The wave is multiplied by the amplitude to get the desired effect of the height of the wave changing.

I also added an offset to the x of every character after the first. This is done by using an if statement to check if the index is greater than 0. If this is the case I assign current x to be the previous x plus the width of the previous character.
Right before the text is displayed, I decrement the x by 6.0f so that the line of lyrics scrolls towards the left of the screen.

``` Java
for(int i = 0; i < lyrics.size(); i++)
{
	LyricLine lyricLine = lyrics.get(i);

	if(mv.getAudioPlayer().position() >= lyricLine.timestamp)
	{
		amp = mv.getSmoothedAmplitude() * 300;
            
		for(int j = 0; j < lyricLine.line.size(); j++)
		{
			Character c = lyricLine.line.get(j);
                    
			if(j > 0)
			{	
				Character prev = lyricLine.line.get(j - 1);
				c.x = prev.x + mv.textWidth(prev.c) * 1.3f;
			}
                    
			c.x -= 6.0f;
			mv.fill(255);
			mv.textSize(32);
			mv.text(c.c, c.x, c.y + PApplet.sin(PApplet.radians(c.x)) * amp);

		}
	}
}
```
	
### Darren: Growing Bubbles

![Bubbles](images/j5.png)

### Domas: Acoustic Bars

![Bars](images/j6.png)

# How It Works

## File Structure

## Audio-To-Visual Analysis

## Playback Control

# Markdown Tutorial

This is *emphasis*

This is a bulleted list

- Item
- Item

This is a numbered list

1. Item
1. Item

This is a [hyperlink](http://bryanduggan.org)

# Headings
## Headings
#### Headings
##### Headings

This is code:

```Java
public void render()
{
	ui.noFill();
	ui.stroke(255);
	ui.rect(x, y, width, height);
	ui.textAlign(PApplet.CENTER, PApplet.CENTER);
	ui.text(text, x + width * 0.5f, y + height * 0.5f);
}
```

So is this without specifying the language:

```
public void render()
{
	ui.noFill();
	ui.stroke(255);
	ui.rect(x, y, width, height);
	ui.textAlign(PApplet.CENTER, PApplet.CENTER);
	ui.text(text, x + width * 0.5f, y + height * 0.5f);
}
```

This is an image using a relative URL:

![An image](images/p8.png)

This is an image using an absolute URL:

![A different image](https://bryanduggandotorg.files.wordpress.com/2019/02/infinite-forms-00045.png?w=595&h=&zoom=2)

This is a youtube video:

[![YouTube](http://img.youtube.com/vi/J2kHSSFA4NU/0.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J2kHSSFA4NU)

This is a table:

| Heading 1 | Heading 2 |
|-----------|-----------|
|Some stuff | Some more stuff in this column |
|Some stuff | Some more stuff in this column |
|Some stuff | Some more stuff in this column |
|Some stuff | Some more stuff in this column |

Commit message:

how it works and files

README.md, after:

# Moby Duck: An Abstract Audio Visualiser

Video Demonstration:

[![YouTube](https://i.ytimg.com/vi/COJVn6kwEO0/maxresdefault.jpg?sqp=-oaymwEmCIAKENAF8quKqQMa8AEB-AH-CYAC0AWKAgwIABABGBEgcigxMA8=&rs=AOn4CLAHZKIKf9K6LVqRE-1SGsLdISzUow)](https://youtu.be/COJVn6kwEO0)

## Playback Instructions
- To start the visual demonstration: press the spacebar (space key) once
- To restart: press the spacebar again

*The scenes automatically changes during playback (see 'How It Works')*

## Project Members
- C21376161 Dmytro Kosynskyy [@DimaKosy](https://github.com/DimaKosy)
- C21344786 Shawn Lorenzo [@ByteFlypVS](https://github.com/ByteFlypVS)
- C21518659 Norbert Krupa [@Voirtez](https://github.com/Voirtez)
- C21427252 Darren Grants [@darrenomight](https://github.com/darrenomight)
- C21321073 Domas Mockus [@Orbdom](https://github.com/Orbdom)

# Description Of The Project

## Project Brief
- Create an abstract visual representation of a song of your choosing
- Visualise using Java Processing, Minim and/or Processing Sound libraries
- It should represent the chosen song's theme, narrative, mood, tempo and/or structure
- Showcase teamwork, creativity, technical skills and communication through tools such as GitHub for project management

## The Song: Moby Duck (The Longest Johns)

[![YouTube](https://i.ytimg.com/vi/xA7e_dxDOCo/hq720.jpg?sqp=-oaymwEcCNAFEJQDSFXyq4qpAw4IARUAAIhCGAFwAcABBg==&rs=AOn4CLDuQlaJv-4ykUREOM2cqb-ALwUR2w)](https://youtu.be/xA7e_dxDOCo)

While Dmytro was searching for a song for our project, he got confronted by a flock of ducks. They wouldn't scatter quickly enough so he apparently waved his foot across them and scared them off!
Then he had an idea...

Sea shanties were always cool to him and one of the most memorable ones when he saw those ducks was this hit by The Longest Johns. It depicts a long-retired sailor, whose solitude was interrupted by a mythical, giant duck on his lake. He then goes to settle the score with the duck with the help of his ol' mates, and after a long, well-fought battle, they celebrated with a banquet of BBQed duck, pancakes and oyster sauce!

When he gave the piece to the team, we thought it was funny and would be a fun theme to explore; from ducks to ships to waves and even obscure nautical references! It was light-hearted and fast-paced, and honestly we agreed to use it as everyone else had no idea what song to choose at the time... Oh well!

## Visual Representations

### Dmytro: Ducks, Ships And Waves

![Duck Scale](images/j2.png)
I made two visuals for this project, one is a simple circle of rotating ducks which respond to the frequency bands. It is based off the cubes example shown in class.

```Java
for(int i = 0; i < DuckScaler.length; i++) {
		DuckScaler[i] = PApplet.map(mv.getSmoothedBands()[i],0,200,0.5f,3);
}
```

![Duck Battle](images/j4.png)
The second visual creates an array of points. These points go from right to left at a set pace, their height is set by the average frequency bands value which is then multiplied by a sin() function and lerped.

```Java
float BufferAvg() {
	float Avg;
	Avg = 0;
	for(int i = 0 ; i < mv.getBands().length ; i ++) {
		Avg += mv.getSmoothedBands()[i];
	}

	return (Avg/mv.getBands().length) *  0.3f;
}
```

```Java
if(p2 < p1) {
	points[(i + ((Move < 0)?0:1))%AmtPoints] = PApplet.lerp(points[(i + ((Move < 0)?1:0))%AmtPoints],(float)Math.sin(i*0.1)*ToLerp,0.5f);
	continue;
}
```

Each point is joined to the next point to make a wave like so:
```Java
mv.line(p1, points[i] + WaveHeight, p2, points[(i+1)%AmtPoints] + WaveHeight);
```
...which allows us to render a single wave.

By rendering multiple waves we can also call on the JoinWaveVerts() function.
This function joines the vertices of the waves so as to create triangles between them.

```Java
void JoinWaveVerts(Wave w1) {
	if(w1 == null) {
		return;
	}

	for(int i = 0; i < w1.AmtPoints; i++) {

		float p1 = ((float)(i)/AmtPoints)*WaveWidth;
		float p2 = (i < w1.AmtPoints)?(((float)(i+1)/AmtPoints)*WaveWidth):(p1);

		mv.line(p1, GrabWavePoint(p1), p1, w1.GrabWavePoint(p1));
		mv.line(p1, GrabWavePoint(p1)+2, p2, w1.GrabWavePoint(p2)-2);
	}
}
```

### Shawn: What's Out There?

![Planning Chart](images/j3.png)
Taking inspiration from the general nautical theme of the song, I created a visual that represents how sailors would get their data on the high seas. It features 4 distinct elements:

- A background chart 'surface' to put the visual displays on
- A sonar wave with tuned amplitudes to cover certain frequency ranges
- A radar screen with an estimated location of ducks from the sonar
- A radio transmission set to check how the sailor's communications are holding

Audio data was being processed through the MyVisual/Visual class, which uses the Java Minim audio processing library. This was then modified to create certain wave amplitude behaviour for the sonar, such as:

``` Java
// Wave visualisation method (with scaling/lerp functions)
public void modWave(float scale)
{
	mv.pushStyle();
	mv.beginShape();

	for(int i = 0; i < mv.getAudioBuffer().size(); i++)
	{
		waveX = MyVisual.map(i, 0, mv.getAudioBuffer().size(), topX, topX+shapeW);
		waveY = MyVisual.map(mv.getAudioBuffer().get(i), -1, 1, -scale*shapeH, scale*shapeH);
		waveY = MyVisual.lerp(topY+shapeH/2, topY+shapeH/2+waveY, scale);
		waveY = MyVisual.constrain(waveY, topY, topY+shapeH);

		mv.smooth();
		mv.noFill();
		mv.stroke(255, 255, 0); // Change colour here
		mv.strokeWeight(4);
		mv.curveVertex(waveX, waveY);
	}

	mv.endShape();
	mv.popStyle();
}
```

...where 'scale' is a scaling factored applied to the lerped y-values for the AudioBuffer.

While the current positions of the displays are fixed for the project, they could be rearranged in any alignment through code similar to this:

``` Java
sonar1.screen(shapeW, (shapeH/2)-(shapeH/3), shapeW/2.5f, shapeH/6, 7, "Broadband Sonar", shapeH/42, "Hz", 0);
```

...where the final parameter '0' indicates that the display should be left-centre aligned to the chart.

It should be noted that the sailor from the song was likely from the 1800's, so he probably didn't have access to these tools to find pirates, let alone a giant duck!

### Norbert: Lively Lyrics

![Lyric Wave](images/j1.png)
My visual is a wave of lyrics that changes height with the amplitude of the song. To make this, I used three classes:

#### Norbert
- Primary drawing class
- Handles all logic in this visual

#### Character
- Stores the display character as a char data type
- Also stores the x and y values as floats

``` Java
public class Character
{
    MyVisual mv;
    char c;
    float x;
    float y;

    public Character(MyVisual mv, char c, float x, float y)
    {
        this.mv = mv;
        this.c = c;
        this.x = x;
        this.y = y;

    }
}
```

#### LyricLine
- Stores lyric line as an array list of Character objects
- Also stores the timestamp for the song

``` Java
public class LyricLine
{
    MyVisual mv;
    ArrayList<Character> line = new ArrayList<Character>();
    int timestamp;

    public LyricLine(MyVisual mv, ArrayList<Character> line, int timestamp)
    {
        this.mv = mv;
        this.line = line;
        this.timestamp = timestamp;
    }
}
```

I created an array list of LyricLine objects in the Norbert class. I then parsed the lyrics as a text file in the format <timestamp in milliseconds> <lyric> split this into two parts.
I stored the timestamps into the timestamp variables in the LyricLine objects. Then I split the line of lyrics into individual characters and stored the characters into the array list of Character objects in the LyricLine object.

``` Java
for(int i = 0; i < lines.length; i++)
{
	String[] words = PApplet.split(lines[i], " ");
      	int timestamp = Integer.parseInt(words[0]);

      	ArrayList<Character> line = new ArrayList<Character>();

      	for(int j = 1; j < words.length; j++)
       	{
       		String word = words[j];

              	for(int k = 0; k < word.length(); k++)
                {
                	char c = word.charAt(k);
                    	line.add(new Character(mv, c, mv.width + mv.textWidth(c ), mv.height / 2)); 
                }

               	line.add(new Character(mv, ' ', mv.width, mv.height / 2));
    	}

     	lyrics.add(new LyricLine(mv, line, timestamp));
}
```

I then use an if statement to check the position of the audio player. If the position of the player is equal to the timestamp, the corresponding line of lyrics is displayed on the right side of the screen.
The lyric line is displayed character by character using the text() function adding sin(radians(x) * amplitude to the y. The wave is multiplied by the amplitude to get the desired effect of the height of the wave changing.

I also added an offset to the x of every character after the first. This is done by using an if statement to check if the index is greater than 0. If this is the case I assign current x to be the previous x plus the width of the previous character.
Right before the text is displayed, I decrement the x by 6.0f so that the line of lyrics scrolls towards the left of the screen.

``` Java
for(int i = 0; i < lyrics.size(); i++)
{
	LyricLine lyricLine = lyrics.get(i);

	if(mv.getAudioPlayer().position() >= lyricLine.timestamp)
	{
		amp = mv.getSmoothedAmplitude() * 300;
            
		for(int j = 0; j < lyricLine.line.size(); j++)
		{
			Character c = lyricLine.line.get(j);
                    
			if(j > 0)
			{	
				Character prev = lyricLine.line.get(j - 1);
				c.x = prev.x + mv.textWidth(prev.c) * 1.3f;
			}
                    
			c.x -= 6.0f;
			mv.fill(255);
			mv.textSize(32);
			mv.text(c.c, c.x, c.y + PApplet.sin(PApplet.radians(c.x)) * amp);

		}
	}
}
```
	
### Darren: Growing Bubbles

![Bubbles](images/j5.png)

### Domas: Acoustic Bars

![Bars](images/j6.png)

# How It Works
All our code is ran through the main and MyVisual that was provided with the skeleton code. We are using the functions that were already implemented and building ontop of them.

Each persons code is ran through a visual function in their main class. This allows for consitancy in our code.
We decide which persons visual is playing with an if statement.
See Visual representation for info on how each member did their code


## File Structure
Each member created a package for themself, inside of which we had our own code.
All of our assets were stored inside a data folder.

All of our asset files are contained within the data folder

## Audio-To-Visual Analysis

## Playback Control

# Markdown Tutorial

This is *emphasis*

This is a bulleted list

- Item
- Item

This is a numbered list

1. Item
1. Item

This is a [hyperlink](http://bryanduggan.org)

# Headings
## Headings
#### Headings
##### Headings

This is code:

```Java
public void render()
{
	ui.noFill();
	ui.stroke(255);
	ui.rect(x, y, width, height);
	ui.textAlign(PApplet.CENTER, PApplet.CENTER);
	ui.text(text, x + width * 0.5f, y + height * 0.5f);
}
```

So is this without specifying the language:

```
public void render()
{
	ui.noFill();
	ui.stroke(255);
	ui.rect(x, y, width, height);
	ui.textAlign(PApplet.CENTER, PApplet.CENTER);
	ui.text(text, x + width * 0.5f, y + height * 0.5f);
}
```

This is an image using a relative URL:

![An image](images/p8.png)

This is an image using an absolute URL:

![A different image](https://bryanduggandotorg.files.wordpress.com/2019/02/infinite-forms-00045.png?w=595&h=&zoom=2)

This is a youtube video:

[![YouTube](http://img.youtube.com/vi/J2kHSSFA4NU/0.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J2kHSSFA4NU)

This is a table:

| Heading 1 | Heading 2 |
|-----------|-----------|
|Some stuff | Some more stuff in this column |
|Some stuff | Some more stuff in this column |
|Some stuff | Some more stuff in this column |
|Some stuff | Some more stuff in this column |
